---
id: "2020-08-14"
author: German Molina
image: children.jpg
description: The Occupant is an absolutely emotionless individual whose main motivation is to minimize the physiological efforts that cause its own discomfort. It is very different from People.
title: Occupants, people, and a proposal for a behavioural building science
---


Behavioural Economics is the sub-discipline of Economic Sciences that 
acknowledges the emotional, cognitive, and psychological factors that affect 
people’s choices. While these might sound like obvious factors to include in 
any model, providing a coherent and applicable framework for doing so can be 
a challenging task. In fact, thanks to their contributions to this, Daniel 
Kahneman and Richard Thaler were awarded the Nobel prize in Economic 
Sciences in 2002 and 2017, respectively.


Incorporating emotional and psychological factors into economics can change 
the way in which a whole discipline sees people and their motivations. 
Classical Economics used--and often still do--the abstraction of the *Homo 
Economicus*, the Economic Man. Namely, a fully rational individual who often 
possesses an impressively high and clear knowledge of the world, who has 
very well-defined preferences, and the capacity to predict the likelihood of 
future events. Behavioural Economics, on the contrary, try to utilize a much 
more human abstraction of people. This discipline acknowledges that people 
have self-control issues and estimate a few potential outcomes (using 
heuristics) instead of calculating them all. Likewise, Behavioural Economics 
understand that humans make predictable errors (called biases), and every 
choice is influenced by more than just a hunger for utility-maximization.



I believe a similar transition can happen in Building Sciences. We have, for 
a very long time, utilized the abstraction of the Occupant. While not as 
smart as the Economic man, the Occupant is an absolutely emotionless 
individual whose main motivation is to minimize the physiological efforts 
that cause its own discomfort. Contrary to People, Occupants 
[do not have children or friends](https://buildingsforpeople.org/atlas.html?code=household_composition), 
they [don’t care about their neighbours](https://buildingsforpeople.org/atlas.html?code=bothering_others&domain=acoustic), 
and [the future does not worry them](https://buildingsforpeople.org/atlas.html?layer=expected_outcomes). 
As a matter of fact, Occupants do not have a life. For them, there is 
nothing beyond the goal of minimizing physiological efforts. Unlike 
Occupants, People put comfort in context. People might tolerate an 
uncomfortable room because they are not willing to open the windows due to 
[noise](https://buildingsforpeople.org/atlas.html?code=thermal_comfort_vs_acoustic_performance&domain=acoustic) 
or [lack of safety](https://buildingsforpeople.org/atlas.html?code=safety&domain=acoustic).


Due to their differences, designing buildings for occupants is not the same 
as designing buildings for people. For example, Occupants will very much 
accept any kind of automation in their homes as long as it is able to 
maintain conditions that, according to standards, are comfortable. People, 
on the contrary, might worry about the reliability of the technology, and 
distrust what is it that the machine “thinks” is comfortable. In a similar 
manner, Occupants trust extractor fans because they understand that they 
will clean the air. On the contrary, People [often do not feel that the extractor fans in their kitchens and bathrooms are powerful enough](https://buildingsforpeople.org/atlas.html?code=effective_and_simple_systems&domain=air_quality).


As I stated in the beginning, it is very easy to say that incorporating 
psychology can help us migrate from modelling Occupants to modelling People. 
The difficult part, however, is to introduce a coherent and applicable 
framework for doing so. As part of my PhD, I am trying to carry out this 
complex task by developing the 
[Atlas of Comfort](https://buildingsforpeople.org/atlas.html). While a 
number of still unanswered questions can be extracted from it, it already 
presents a systematic manner in which we can analyse People’s comfort and 
their assessment of the built environment. 



